# Metagenomics simulation workflow
## Scripts to generate and process simulated metagenomics reads with MetaSim and Cope
The simulation is setup as follows:  
- Read are simulated in fasta format (no quality scores);  
- The median insert length of paired end (PE) reads is 550nt;  
- All simulated reads will be PE;  
- Reads are simulated error-free;  
- 16 processors are used in the simulation step.

### Read simulation: Metasim

Metasim software is used to simulate metagenomics read datasets. Use of Metasim is aided by **Metasim.sh** script, which is intended to simulate nine datasets in a single run. These datasets represent the same community (described in the *.mprf file, see below) simulated with combination of three different read lengths (75bp, 150bp, 300bp) and three different dataset sizes (2 x 50,000, 2 x 500,000, 2 x 5,000,000).  
Use of this script requires that the Metasim software is installed and the related species database is properly set up. Full documentation of Metasim is available at <http://ab.inf.uni-tuebingen.de/data/software/metasim/download/V0_9_5/manual.pdf>.

Metasim.sh requires **metasim\_simulation\_table\_1**, a table file with rows like this:

```
dataset_0001	50000			75      		gut_viral_metasim_1000_90sim_allEqual.mprf  
dataset_0002    500000  		75      		gut_viral_metasim_1000_90sim_allEqual.mprf  
dataset_0003    5000000			75      		gut_viral_metasim_1000_90sim_allEqual.mprf  
dataset_0004    50000			150     		gut_viral_metasim_1000_90sim_allEqual.mprf 
<dataset_name>	<n_reads>		<read_length>	<abundance_file>
```
columns are described as follows:  
1. ```<dataset name>``` is used for naming the output folder and the simulated read (compressed) file;  
2. ```<n_reads>``` is the number of reads to be simulated. When PE reads are simulated, this number refers to fwd and rev datasets;  
3. ```<read length>``` is the length of reads to be simulated;  
4. ```<abundance_file>```. Abundance file describing the relative abundance of each species in the dataset to be simulated. Following, some sample lines:

```
1						gi			197261329
1						gi			431811082
1						gi			418488446
1						gi			282598847
1						gi			308814351
1						gi			77864625
<relative_abundance>	<id_type>	<id>
```
columns are described as follows:  
1. ```<relative abundance>``` is a relative number of arbitrary size reflecting the copy number of the genome sequences of this specific taxon in the total taxon set.  
2. ```<id_type>``` corresponds to the column names of the database suitable to identify a genome
sequence. This can be "taxid", "gi" or "name".  
3. ```<id>``` is the corresponding value the for chosen key identifer.  

#####Suggested use of Metasim.sh:  
 run it from within the Metasim software folder. You can specify the working directory as an argument of the script, *i.e.* Metasim.sh \<working_dir\> (please provide full path). 
### Read processing (1): SplitMetasimPairs.sh

The next step in the simulation is the read connection, *i.e.* merging of overlapping ends of reads in a PE to generate a longer overlapped read. The software **Cope** is used to this aim. However, Cope needs two separated files for forward and reverse reads, whereas Metasim outputs simulated reads in *interleaved* format, *e.g.*  

```
>r2.1 |SOURCES={GI=197261329,fw,29451-29526}|ERRORS={}|SOURCE_1="Pseudomonas phage LBL3" (2b16a6cd7f5bb301549640d6e87180794d8b66ec)
ACGAAATCAGAAAAGTGCTTCAGCTAAGATATGTAGCGCTGATTTCGAACGGCTCGATTGCATAT
ATCAATCGCA
>r2.2 |SOURCES={GI=197261329,bw,29732-29807}|ERRORS={}|SOURCE_1="Pseudomonas phage LBL3" (2b16a6cd7f5bb301549640d6e87180794d8b66ec)
AGCGGAGCCGTCCGGGGCCGTAGCGGACGCCGTTTCGACCGTTACCGGAAGACCGCTCGCGGCCG
GATCGACTCC
>r1.1 |SOURCES={GI=197261329,bw,32107-32182}|ERRORS={}|SOURCE_1="Pseudomonas phage LBL3" (2b16a6cd7f5bb301549640d6e87180794d8b66ec)
CAAACAGAGGGCGATTGTTGAATATGACGTTCGTGGACGCCCAGTCCCATCGCATGATTTGCGAG
CGATAAGAGC
>r1.2 |SOURCES={GI=197261329,fw,31847-31922}|ERRORS={}|SOURCE_1="Pseudomonas phage LBL3" (2b16a6cd7f5bb301549640d6e87180794d8b66ec)
CTCTGAAGCTGATGGGTCGATGGCGTTCTATTCTCGCCAGGGGTCCGCTGGTCCTACCCAGGATA
TCCTGTTCAG
```
The script **SplitMetasimPairs.py** splits a file *dataset_000?-reads.fa.gz* generated by the script Metasim.sh in two files: *dataset_000?-reads.2.fa* and *dataset_000?-reads.2.fa*. Please note that SplitMetasimPairs.py requires the Python library BioPython. The **SplitMetasimPairs.sh** script is provided to automate the execution of the SplitMetasimPairs.py on the group of nine datasets generated by a single run of Metasim.sh.

#####Suggested use of SplitMetasimPairs.sh:
Put both SplitMetasimPairs.sh and SplitMetasimPairs.py in your PATH and run them in the same folder of the dataset\_000? folders. Please note that SplitMetasimPairs.sh is configured to run nine array jobs.

### Read processing (2): Cope 

**Cope.sh** iterates COPE on the group of nine datasets generated by a single run of Metasim.sh. for each dataset, it outputs three files:  
- dataset\_000?-reads.R1.fa;  
- dataset\_000?-reads.R2.fa;  
- dataset\_000?-reads.merged.fa  
which can then be used with PathoScope.  

#####Suggested use of Cope.sh:
Put Cope.sh in your PATH and run them in the same folder of the dataset\_000? folders.

### Hints and tips
...
